---
title: Tragic vs. depressive
published_date: 2025-12-12 02:01:57 +0000
tags:
  - music
  - general thoughts
data:
  lang: en
  nav: posts
  alt_url: /de/posts/deprimierend/
---

This post is mainly the result of a recent discussion with a friend about what the most depressing piece of classical music is.

I'll start, just because it's interesting, not because it's relevant, with the etymology of the word tragic: It traces back to the Ancient Greek *tragodia*, which translates directly to "goat-song" (*tragos* + *oide*). Even the Ancient Greeks themselves were puzzled as to how this exactly came about; the most common explanation is that the prize for the best dramatic performance at Athenian festivals was often a goat. The person who influenced the meaning of the tragedy most, Aristotle, thought it was because the tragedy evolved from the *dithyramb*, a hymn sung in honour of Dionysus, containing a chorus of satyrs. But, whatever the exact origins are, relevant to my point is that the *tragodia* of the Ancient Greeks was a **dramatic imitation** of a particular series of events, which was designed to arouse pity and fear among the audience, aiming to accomplish *catharsis* (purging/purification) of those emotions. Through the immense influence of Aristotles *Poetics*, these connotations (emphasis on the dramatic, performative, then cleansing aspect) have been largely carried through the ages to the modern day, although it is worth noting that pity/fear should be replaced by the emotions today considered the least desirable; these would probably be melancholy, heartbreak, etc., but that's a topic for another post.

Aristotle obviously doesn't hold a monopoly on the meaning of tragedy. Many other thinkers, like for example Kafka, denied the importance of catharsis in tragedy and characterized it as more depressive, in the sense that I will define shortly. However, there are two reasons I will stick to this conception of tragedy: Firstly, I think that this is what is most commonly meant by tragedy, due partly to Aristotles influence and partly to the existence of the tragedy as a form of theater. Secondly, I just want a word to label this particular type of artwork and I think that "tragic" is best suited.

Contrast this with the "depressing", which comes from the latin *deprimere*. This means to *press* or *crush down*. Unlike the tragic, which in a certain sense is uplifting, through *catharsis*, the depressive leaves no light at the end of the tunnel. A depressive artwork has an effect analogous (but much weaker and shorter lived) to clinical depression: numbness, hopelessness, maybe a lack of interest in activities you would usually enjoy, etc.. The tragic induces emotion in a way that then makes it more comprehendible and "manageable", the depressive crushes the mechanisms needed to process emotions and leaves its victim exposed to negative thoughts.

This is why I am confused when people (like my friend) cite something like Tchaikovsky's sixth Symphony as being depressive. I can understand the train of thought, because Tchaikovsky struggled with depression his whole life and possibly intended his sixth Symphony to be a suicide note. The piece is also certainly extremely evocative of sorrowful emotions. But the tragic or depressive effect of an artwork should be measured by its impact on (here) the listener, and not by the state the artist was in while creating the piece. Does Tchaikovsky's sixth really grind down the listeners psyche to a lasting, naked state of dejection, or does it temporarily induce melancholy in a way that makes the listener thoughtful, and more appreciative of life? I think most people experience the latter; aside from many parts of the symphony being full of hope, playfulness and downright joy, even the most despondent parts, like the famed dying heartbeat of the ending, are dripping with emotion. This emotion being present forces you to process it, causing a tragic effect; compare this with the end of the next paragraph, which describes a depressive ending.

An example of a genuinely depressive piece of music is Shostakovich's 15th Symphony. Instead of being heavily laden with tragic emotion, the first movement sounds almost whimsical; the composer described it as being "*reminiscent of a toy store under a blue sky*". But the movement has, for me, a cynical edge, seeming a bit empty and listless. The symphony quotes extensively from Rossini (William Tell Overture), Wagner (Tristan Chord, Fate motif), Glinka and Shostakovich's earlier works; the quotes appear mostly ironical and absurd due to seeming either too trivial and blase, too profound, or otherwise misplaced in the context they are used in. Most chilling is the ending: an unsettling, jangling percussion beat, the clattering of a skeleton, overlaid with an A major drone and a faraway melody on the celesta, fading into nothing. Overall it feels drained and exhausted, like the composer has been intellectually beaten into submission after a lifetime of artistic oppression. The genuinely depressive effect comes from emotion being stifled, not expressed, and replaced by wistfulness/indifference/cynicism. 

Anyway, I hope that didn't get too dark; it is just a distinction I think is worth talking about. Next post will be about something happier (like quantum information theory)!